And we have this white powder in front
of me. You got a big smile on your face.
>> I do because I don't care who you are,
you should definitely be having this.
Let's talk about creatine. Phenomenal
research shows you can creatine your way
out of sleep deprivation. It can protect
your brain against a concussion, stroke,
[music] from stress. And there was a
study done on Alzheimer's disease
patients. And they found that patients
not only preserved their cognitive
functions, but they had more energy and
they were able to exercise more. And I
know this because I'm a clinician and
over the last decade I've been
surrounded by the greatest neurosurgeons
in the world studying the brain. And so
I'm here to tackle one disease and that
is Alzheimer's because it generally
starts in our 30s and 60 million people
worldwide have Alzheimer's. [music] 70%
being women. And I get angry and I get
passionate because women have been lied
to. They've been underrepresented. They
downplay their symptoms or they're too
scared to ask their doctor for advice.
And what people don't really know is
that it is a preventable disease, but
it's like endstage cancer. Once you get
the diagnosis, there is no cure. And the
fact that so many people are at the
mercy of a disease that is preventable
is not okay with me. And I don't think
people understand these [music] things.
Like people don't really know that we're
becoming more sedentary, which is a
disease. And there was a study that was
done on this that showed that if you do
10 air squats every hour, this can
compensate for your sedentary lifestyle.
And then we have several lifestyle
factors that can lower your risk of
getting Alzheimer's disease, as well as
showing you what 5 minutes a day can do
for your brain performance. Just using a
tennis ball and an eye patch.
Guys, I've got a quick favor to ask you.
We're approaching a significant
subscriber milestone on this show, and
roughly 69% of you that listen and love
the show haven't yet subscribed for
whatever reason. If there was ever a
time for you to do us a favor, if we've
ever done anything for you, giving you
value in any way, it is simply hitting
that subscribe button. And it means so
much to myself, but also to my team
because when we hit these milestones, we
go away as a team and celebrate. And
it's the thing, the simple, free, easy
thing you can do to help make this show
a little bit better every single week.
So, that's a favor I would ask you. And
um if you do [clears throat] hit the
subscribe button, I won't let you down.
And we'll continue to find small ways to
make this whole production better. Thank
you so much for being part of this
journey. Means the world. And uh yeah,
let's do this.
[music]
Louisa,
what is it you do in simple terms? And I
guess most importantly, why is it that
you do it? And why now?
>> Over the last decade, I've been studying
the brain. I'm both a clinician and an
academic. So, I get to see the brain and
I also get to research it. And I'm
really here to tackle one disease and
that is Alzheimer's disease.
>> Why is this so important now?
>> Right now because 60 million people
worldwide have Alzheimer's disease. That
number is going to triple by the year
2050. 110 million women will have
Alzheimer's disease by the year 2050.
This is a disease that robs you of who
you are, your complete identity. So,
we're going to get really into this
straight away cuz I brought Henry with
me, right?
>> And for anyone that can't see, Henry is
a model brain that she's holding in her
hands.
>> This is around 2 lb. And if you actually
feel it and you know, if you actually
feel a real human brain, it feels like
tofu, but this is everything you are.
And the fact that so many people are at
the mercy of a disease that is
preventable is not okay with me. It
doesn't sit well with me. We used to
think that women were disproportionately
affected by Alzheimer's disease because
we lived longer because age played a
role in it. But we now have substantial
evidence to show that it's not the fact
that women live longer or people in
general because dementia and Alzheimer's
disease are not part of the natural
brain aging process. For women, and they
differ from men, and we can separate the
sexes and talk about it, for women, it
is purely because being a woman is a
risk factor for getting this disease.
Now, if we go through and we have a look
at all of the people that currently have
Alzheimer's disease, 95% of them could
have been prevented because this is not
a disease of genetics. It's a disease of
lifestyle.
>> 95% of it could have been prevented.
>> Correct? We're we're born with our with
our genetic makeup. Meaning that, for
example, if you have a genetic mutation
on chromosome 4, you will get
Huntington's disease. There is nothing
we can do about that. That's how you
were born. But when it comes to
Alzheimer's disease, there's around 20
to 30 genes involved in the disease.
Only around 3%
of the disease cases right now were
driven through those genetic mutations.
The genetic mutations that you are born
with, you get them from mom and dad are
presinelin one, presinelin 2 and the
amaloid precursor protein. So you if you
have a genetic mutation in one of these
genes, you will get some form of
dementia.
>> What is the age range where people will
start to experience Alzheimer's?
>> Let's just actually take a broad
overview of what Alzheimer's disease is.
Okay. So you've probably heard of
dementia. Yeah.
>> So dementia is the umbrella term. So
Alzheimer's disease is sits under the
umbrella. It's a form of dementia.
There's fronttotemporal dementia which
is what Bruce Willis has. There's
dementia with Louis bodies. There's
Parkinson's dementia. There's vascular
dementia. This disease dementia or
Alzheimer's disease is a disease of
midlife. And so it generally starts in
our 30s. It starts in our 30s, but the
first symptoms show up in our late 60s,
70s and beyond.
>> When you say it starts,
>> yeah, our brain fully develops at around
25 years old. 25 to 30. And after that
that's when we if we don't take care of
our brain we start getting a decline in
these functions. Now let's go back to
the brain. The brain is 87 billion
neurons around 5 to 10,000 connections
per neuron. The my favorite area of the
brain is the cerebellum. And the piking
cells inside the cerebellum have upwards
of 50,000 connections per cell. So so
tightly dense and there is so much
happening. It takes 20% of the total
calories that you consume every day to
power this thing. And it's the most
vascular richch organ in the entire
body. Over time, through things such as
sleep deprivation,
poor diet, lack of physical activity,
environmental toxins, this slowly
erodess at the functioning of the brain.
And over time, this starts to compound
because that's what biology is.
Everything is compounding. One night of
sleep deprivation raises your risk of
amaloid beta, which is one of the
hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease
pathology, by 4%. That's just one night
of sleep deprivation. Imagine a new
mother or a shift worker or a physician
in their residency getting countless
nights of sleep deprivation day in and
day out. Imagine all of that
compounding. And what happens? Well, we
end up with either neuronal loss, which
is like the complete atrophy of certain
parts of the brain. And that's what is
mild cognitive impairment. Mild
cognitive impairment is a pre-dementure
state.
>> So, what is this that I have here? This
photo um of a brain.
>> You've got the sagittal view right now
of the brain. And we're looking at a
healthy brain on here. As you can see,
I'm going to show it up here on the left
hand side. You can see that the brain is
thick. We can see that the integrity of
the gray matter which sits out here is
thick. It's voluous. Okay. We can see
that the ventricles are smaller. We go
over here and we see thinning of the
cortex. You can see these big spaces
between the gy. These are thick because
the gray matter has atrophied. It's
shrunk. You can see that the space
between the cortex itself and the skull,
there's a bigger space. You can see
these ventricles here, these
butterflyshaped ventricles. This is
thicker. This is thinner. We can see
atrophy down here. So essentially, the
brain is getting smaller and smaller
>> at the age of 30. If I do everything
right, and we were to sort of plot this
on a graph of where I land at 70, what
is the variance of where I'll end up at
70? You know, my brain is quite
important to me. And I do worry. I think
[__] like I think I worry in part
because I I I sit and interview a lot of
people at a lot of different ages and
one thing you notice as an interviewer
is some people at 60
have are razor sharp
>> and some people at 60 are not as razor
sharp.
>> Yeah.
>> Their ability to articulate their words,
their memory recall, their ability to
understand stats and stories, all of
this. And I sit here and go, I wonder
what the difference is.
>> Yeah. And that's actually beautiful
because it brings up this important
concept in neuroscience called cognitive
reserve. And that's your brain's ability
to withhold capacity to overcome
stresses. Okay. So you've probably heard
for example, let's use the analogy of
physical performance, your V2 max, which
is a measure of your peak respiratory
fitness. You know how well you can
utilize oxygen [clears throat]
>> when you are at a at a high intensity
state. How well does your body utilize
oxygen? The the fitter you are, the more
reserve you have to overcome stress.
Stress such as an infection, everyday
stresses, sleep deprivation, surgery,
the more reserve you have in your bank
to overcome that. The same is with your
brain. The more cognitive reserve that
you have, the more cognitive capacity
that you have been training year on and
year out will save you at 60 from
harmful insults such as you can get a
woman at the age of 80 with a head full
of amaloid beta.
>> Amaloid beta being
>> the one of the hallmarks of Alzheimer's
disease. You can get somebody with a
head full of amaloid
>> which is like a plaque on the brain.
>> Yeah. it it's a protein that's actually
it's a it's a protein that lives inside
the neuron itself and we can explain
what that is which I will in a second
but let me just tell you you can have a
head full of amaloid in this person and
they have retained their cognitive
functions then you can have somebody
else with hardly any amaloid but they've
lost their cognitive functions and this
all comes down to cognitive reserve
>> and cognitive reserve lives where in the
head
>> you've got around 5 to 10,000
connections per cell. Over time, those
connections fail. Now, those connections
are responsible for your thinking, your
processing speed. Every time you have a
thought, you build a new connection. The
more connections that you have, the more
things that you see, the more novelty
that you give your brain, the richer it
gets, the more stable it gets. So, the
ends of these of the neurons, we have
dendrites. And coming off the dendrites
are these little trees. Imagine a
branch. That's the dendrite. And all of
the leaves that come off it, all these
little dendritic trees, if you will, and
they connect to nearby cells, 10 10,000
cells over time, those are the
connections that fall. Those are the
connections that fail. They fail because
you don't utilize them.
>> So, the way that one would build reserve
at the age of 30 is to
>> is by exercising. We can build reserve
in a number of different ways. In fact,
there was a really wonderful study that
just came out that I just read about and
they found that those who preserved
cognitive capacity at 75 years old were
handwriting and reading. So, handwriting
and reading preserves cognitive
functions.
Exercise is one of the most potent
stimulus for brain health and
Alzheimer's disease prevention and
cognitive reserve. The more you
exercise, the bigger your brain.
>> What about scrolling on social media?
Does it improve my reserve if I'm
watching videos?
>> It's in the opposite.
>> Why would that be? Cuz I'm still
learning stuff.
>> Yeah.
>> When I'm on the internet.
>> Because what you're doing then is you
are relying on short dopamine hits.
Every time you scroll, you're sending
signals to your brain that you're
getting a dopamine hit. And your brain
gets used to it. Remember, your brain is
only there for two things, survival and
reproduction. So every time that you
stress your brain in the smallest amount
of times, you're giving it dopamine
hits, it doesn't allow us to do other
things for a sustained period of time
like focus, read, have a conversation.
>> So writing and reading are good for
building up my neurological reserves.
>> Yeah, neurological reserves. It doesn't
compare to what exercise can do for the
brain. And it's so sad because around
80% of the US population don't exercise
for at least 30 30 minutes a week, which
is actually quite scary. The physical
activity guidelines are 150 minutes to
300 minutes of moderate to rigorous
physical activity per week. What's the
most compelling study you've ever
encountered that proves that exercise is
central to Alzheimer's prevention and
brain health?
>> When we look at all of the data, we can
see that the biggest amount of return on
investment is from resistance training.
>> Resistance training being
>> strength training. One of the most
compelling studies was probably the um
the smart trial where they uh took a
group of people with mild cognitive
impairment and gave them two to three
times per week of resistance training
and they not only preserved their
cognitive functions. They enhanced their
processing speed. They enhanced their
fluid intelligence and they had slowing
of the gray matter.
>> The gray matter.
>> Yeah. So your brain consists of both
gray and white matter. So gray matter
are the cell bodies that lives on the
outer side outer portions of your brain
and the white matter is deep within the
brain and that's where all of our
myelinated neurons live and over time we
see that we can have little lesions in
the white matter of the brain. So, a lot
of the times people will ask me,
"Stephen, I'm scared my mother had
Alzheimer's disease. I'm scared I'm
going to get it." And we were talking
about genetics before. And there's
another genetic risk factor that we
didn't talk about. The APOE E4 gene uh
is one of the the strongest risk factors
of getting Alzheimer's disease, but it
is not a foregone conclusion that you're
going to get it. So, Chris Hemsworth was
tested and he has two copies of this
gene. So you get two copies, one from
mom, one from dad. It's the apo
lipoprotein E gene and it comes in three
main variants. So you've got APOE E2,
ApoE3 and ApoE E4.
So I'm a 33 carrier. I've been tested
and that's the general population.
They're 33. So it doesn't raise my risk
of getting the disease, but it also
doesn't protect me. If you've got a copy
of the APOE E2 gene, it protects you
against the disease. But when you have a
copy of the APOE E4 gene, it raises your
risk by two to three times.
If you have two copies of the gene, it
raises your risk by 10 times. If you are
a male,
here's the devastating thing. If you are
a female with one copy of the gene, you
are at doubled the risk than your male
counterpart. So one copy of the gene of
ApoE4 gene for a female raises your risk
by about sixfold whereas two copies
raises your risk by 15fold.
>> And how would one go and get checked?
>> You can get the ApoE4 gene checked uh
with your doctor. It's a simple blood
test.
>> On this point of resistance training,
I've heard you talk about how the legs
>> Mhm.
>> are so important. Having strong legs,
>> having strong legs is by far the most
important tool in your toolbox for the
prevention of Alzheimer's disease. And
this was made certain to me when I read
a study done on identical twins, exact
same genetic profile,
>> and they tracked them. And they did
cognitive tests and MRIs, and they
tracked them over a 10-year period. And
what they found was that the twin who
possessed the greater strength and the
most leg power had a bigger brain,
larger gray matter volume. They
preserved their cognitive functions.
They uh did better on different
cognitive tests.
>> Why is resistance training increasing
the size of my brain?
>> Resistance training does so much for
your brain. The first thing is we have
to think about the journey that we're
going on, right? So when you look at all
of the studies, I want to make it really
clear, all of the studies show that in
order to produce the neural effects of
resistance training, you need to be
lifting at around 80% of your one
repetition max. So 80% of one RM. So
that's quite heavy. There is so much
controversy on social media right now.
Should I lift heavy? Should I lift
light? And when it comes to hypertrophy
alone, so increase in muscle, muscle
mass, muscle cell size, you can get
there, men can get there, women can get
there by lifting light, high reps, or
you can get there by lifting heavy and
low reps. It just depends on who you are
and how much time you have. But when it
comes to the brain specifically, you
want to be lifting heavy for several
reasons. The first one is when we lift
heavy, when we literally like when we
contract our muscle like this, we are
releasing a whole set of chemicals.
They're called myioines. And when
they're released from the muscle, they
go up to the brain and they do
beneficial things for our cognitive
performance, our cognition, and they
help with the growth and proliferation
of new neurons in the hippocampus.
And it's the first thing to go during
Alzheimer's disease. it actually
shrinks. This holds our memory. This is
where a lot of our memory consolidation
and learning takes place, which is why
short-term memory is the first thing to
go during this disease. Okay? And as we
get older and what we found is that you
can grow [clears throat]
new neurons in the hippocampus from
structured exercise and consistent
exercise. the biggest growth is going to
occur because of BDNF, brain derived
neurotropic factor. So this is a growth
factor for the brain and it gets
released when we exercise. It gets
released abundantly when we are doing
aerobic training, when we're running,
when we're cycling for long distances,
but also gets released when we do
resistance training. Now, here's the
beautiful thing about it. When we do
resist resistance training and we're
releasing all of these myioines, these
myioines are signaling molecules. They
work together. So we've got one called
irri, okay? And that's a messenger
molecule. So what it does is it actually
helps BDNF express itself. So when we
release this myioin, it goes into the
brain, crosses the bloodb brain barrier
and it tells BDNF to express itself. So
then BDNF goes in and it helps grow new
neurons in the hippocampus. But then
we've got another mioine. Let's just
take isle 6. Interlucan 6 that comes
from the interlucan family.
>> What is that? Sorry.
>> The interlucan family is a a class of
pro-inflammatory cytoines. So these get
released when we are under stress or
you've got an infection or a virus for
example. But when we exercise, it
depends on where the site is. Interlucan
6 instead of acting as a
pro-inflammatory cytoine.
>> Mhm.
>> Instead of [clears throat] creating
inflammation, it acts as an
anti-inflammatory cytoine. So, it goes
into the brain and it lowers
inflammation. In fact, this is uh one of
this was one of the uh first ever
myioines to be studied and they showed
that interlucan 6 is also responsible
for the down reggulation of tumor cell
growth. So exercise is a potent
anti-cancer intervention as well by way
of myioines. How much exercise does one
need to do to avoid the uh cancer
related um side effects but also the
Alzheimer's problem?
>> Well, just 30 minutes a day of aerobic
physical activity can downregulate 13
types of cancers and the most prominent
ones being breast cancer, colon cancer
and prostate cancer. So these three have
been studied most and you get your
anti-cancer effects from the myioine
release. So quite specifically when we
exercise we're getting a robust release
of something called natural killer
cells.
And when we get these natural killer
cells into the plasma and into the
bloodstream, they go into the tumor site
and they do what they were born to do.
They kill. So they go into the tumor
site and they start to kill the tumor
and this is where you get your
anti-cancer effects of it. But you can
also get it from the anti-inflammatory
effects of resistance training,
anti-inflammatory effects of aerobic
training. So these myioind
powerful in fact pharmaceuticals are
spending billions of dollars trying to
replicate these myioind.
I want both men and women lifting heavy
because you've got areas in your brain.
Right across here lives your motor
cortex.
Think of your brain as real estate.
There's real estate in your brain
reserved for lifting heavy. So every
time you lift a heavy weight as opposed
to a lightweight, it takes more neural
real estate to lift that heavy weight.
So the heavier you lift, the greater the
neural drive. The greater the neural
drive, the better it is for your brain.
>> If you had to do just one exercise for
the rest of your life to protect your
brain and you could only pick one,
>> what would it be?
>> Deadlift.
>> Why?
>> If done correctly, the deadlift can use
almost every muscle in your body. Erect
spine a you've got the glutes, you've
got the quads, you've even got seratus
anterior, you've got the you've got your
calf muscles. There is so much
compounding in that one lift would
probably be comparable to a barbell
squat as well.
>> According to the World Health
Organization, we're getting increasingly
more sedentary. I we're moving less and
less in part because of technology, but
also there was this really interesting
study done by the Cleveland Clinic where
they talk about people who are active
sedentary. And this
this felt a little bit personal if I'm
honest. It says a major finding in 2025
found a danger of being active
sedentary, which is people who exercise
for like 30 to 60 minutes but sit for
the remaining 10 hours a day. If you sit
for more than 10 hours a day, your risk
of cardiovascular disease increases even
if you meet weekly exercise goals
because prolonged sitting shuts down
lipoprotein lipes, an enzyme essential
for burning fat and cleaning glucose
from the blood.
That wasn't that's annoying to read
because I feel like that's me.
>> Yeah. And being sedentry is a disease.
You can change the trajectory of your
life by doing 10 air squats every hour
on the hour. And there was a study that
was done on this that showed that if you
do 10 air squats every hour, this can
compensate for your sedentary lifestyle.
Because unfortunately, this is the life
we're living in. We are becoming more
sedentary in our day-to-day lives. We're
sitting more. We're not going out as
much. There's younger kids uh on video
games. They're scrolling. There's so
much happening that is involving our
sedentary lifestyle, which is obviously,
like you said, increasing our risk of
type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular disease,
etc.
>> Yep. You can do it
>> like this.
>> There you go. 10 of those. If you do 10
of those, you can outweigh the benefits
of a 30 minute power walk
>> every hour.
>> Yeah. Yeah.
>> For how many hours? [snorts]
>> 8.
>> Okay. So, I could set an alarm on my
phone.
>> Every hour. Just get up or every 45
minutes get up and do an air squat. And
this is primarily because have you heard
that when you eat you get a massive
spike of glucose. And the best way to
bring that glucose spike back down is by
doing any form of exercise. You can albe
it go out and go for a a fast run, do an
air squat, bring that uh bring that
glucose level back to baseline. And do
you think much about aerobic training as
a preventative measure for Alzheimer's?
>> I love aerobic training. Women are
facing a dilemma on social media because
they're being given so much information.
There is this huge uproar of should I do
zone 2 exercise or should I not do zone
2 exercise?
>> What is zone 2 exercise?
>> So we can think of uh physiology in
zones. Zone one is what you and I are in
right now,
>> right? Zone two is that next level up
and that's generally when we're looking
at exercising at around 60%
of our maximum heart rate and it's where
you can where you're jogging but you can
have a conversation but where you're
huffing and puffing. When we're
exercising we need to produce energy and
that energy firstly starts in the
mitochondria. So we need uh all of our
energy gets created. We create ATP and
that's how we are able to perform the
given task. As soon as we get out of
that zone and we go into zone 3, zone 4
and zone 5, we're producing energy
outside of the mitochondria in the
cytoplasm. And when we're doing that, in
order to do that, we're breaking down
glucose so fast via a pathway called
glycolysis. The byproduct of that is
lactate. And then we produce lactate and
that's actually a fuel source for the
brain. It's also a mioine, right? So
that's when we're in zone 3, zone 4,
zone 5. So a lot of women have been
doing zone 2. They've been going to the
gym. They've been doing zone 2. And I'm
trying to push women to get out of zone
2 for several reasons.
Not because it's not good for you. I
think all forms of exercise are good for
you. The more you move, the better,
right? But let's be really honest. A lot
of people in midlife are busy. They're
time poor. Men actually get a greater
return on investment by doing zone 2.
Women don't get the same return on
investment from doing zone 2. So, I'm
trying to push women to first work on
zone five, zone 3, zone 4, zone 5. If
they can, just do zone five.
Then do two to three sessions of
resistance training a week. And if you
have time left over, that's right there.
I've just described around 4 hours of
exercise. If you have time left over,
then you can work in zone 2. Now, zone 2
is great. If you're going to go out and
go for a long run, you're doing many
things. You are secretreting a lot of
BDNF, which we need. It's a growth
factor for the brain. You're getting a
massive uh amount of blood that's going
into the brain which is great as well.
It's sustained blood delivers oxygen and
nutrients to the brain. You're doing a
lot of things, right? But what you're
not doing is having a complete effect on
the chambers of your heart.
>> Is it better for me to do 5 km on a
treadmill or outside? I would say it's
better for you for the brain to do a
smaller amount of exercise and a higher
threshold
>> because I I was I think I read somewhere
one time that running outside is better
for the brain because it stimulates the
brain
>> of well you're outside so you've got so
many things around you. Imagine your
brain I told you it's got prime real
estate. Every part of the brain is
responsible for a different function
from what you see to what you hear. You
go outside and you can see so many
things. You've got forward ambulation.
So that's going to help you with drive,
motivation, dopamine, but then you're
also taking in the sounds, the senses.
It downregulates inflammation. So you
get so many other things from doing
that. Yes. But 5 km outside compared to
20 minutes of high aerobic physical
activity. What is better for the brain?
I would say that the zone 5 is better
for the brain. The zone 5 training does
a lot for the chambers of your heart as
well. Now, I'm going to grab this. We've
got a little model here, and we can see
that we have h a left chamber. We have a
right chamber, we have actually four
chambers of the heart, but we have
something in the heart called a
ventricle. We've got a left ventricle,
and we've got a right ventricle. Now,
the left ventricle delivers oxygenated
blood to the entire body. It's really
interesting because the chamber of the
left ventricle is like a is like a
muscle, right? It's responsible for
pumping blood to your entire body. It
first gives blood to the brain, which
means it's the most important part of
your body. After it's done giving blood
to the brain, it goes through to the
rest of the body. As we get older, we
get stiffening of these arteries. Okay?
Stiffening of all of the arteries in the
heart. and we get we get something
called left ventricular hypertrophy. So
that's when the ventricle
the left ventricle it starts to get
thicker and when it gets thicker that
means that we can't it's not as strong
it can't pump a lot of blood as much as
it could when it was younger to the rest
of the body. Ben Lavine, Dr. Ben Lavine,
he's a sports cardiologist and he did
this landmark study which changed how I
thought about zone 5 training. He took a
group of sedentary males, average age, I
think it was around 47 to 55, so around
50 years old, and he scanned their
hearts. He did, you know, he looked at,
he did echo cardiograms, he took photos
of the heart. He did everything he could
to see when they was first starting the
protocol, what does their heart look
like? He then subjected them to around 4
hours of exercise per week. And that was
stratified against he did one resistance
training session a week. One was
highintensity physical activity at
around 90% of the maximum heart rate,
the V2 max heart rate. And then in
between he did some long sessions as
well, right? But it was all moderate to
rigorous exercise and that was done over
two years. At the end of those two
years, what he found was that he
remodeled the heart by 20 years. So he
reversed the age related effects and
defects of the heart by 20 years.
Essentially turning the 50-year-old
hearts into 30-year-old hearts just from
physical activity alone.
>> 4 hours a week for 2 years.
>> And what kind of exercise was it?
>> So he got them to do like let's say for
example one of the um one of the
protocols was exercising at 90% of your
maximum heart rate. So when we do this,
we're generally looking at increasing
our V2 max. So you've probably heard
that V2 max along with strength, but V2
max is the strongest predictor of all
cause mortality, right? So if you want
to improve your V2 max and if you want
to get the heart related changes that he
did, what you want to do is you want to
do 20 minutes of V2 max per week just to
keep your V2 max because it does decline
year on and year out. Starting at the
age of around 35, we start to see a
decline in V2 max. So, if we want to
work on our V2 max, we want to be doing
a what we call the Norwegian 4x4. It's
the gold standard of increasing your V2
max. So, you want to get your heart rate
elevated to 90 to 95% for 4 minutes on,
4 minutes off, repeat four times.
So, how do I do this? Well, I actually
do this twice a week because the more
you do, the better. I do this on a
stepper. I do this at the gym and I put
my stepper onto I think I'm at like a
level 14 and I'm working my way up and
I'm staying on there for 4 minutes and
then I'm having a complete stop and a
complete rest for 4 minutes and I'm
repeating that four times.
>> Mhm. [clears throat]
>> So what I'm doing in that moment, I'm
not just getting a massive shunting of
blood to the brain. Okay, which is good.
I'm not just getting a massive release
of myioines and exocines to the brain.
I'm also remodeling the heart. I'm
downregulating tumor cell growth. I'm
improving my cognitive performance. I'm
doing so much more than just exercising
alone.
>> So that's once once a week in Lavine's
study that reversed these guys hearts by
20 years. Y
>> um
>> that you do that once a week. you only
have to do that once a week, but he also
did um he did around 70% of maximum
heart rate for around 2 hours a week.
And he also threw in one resistance
training session.
So consistency is key.
>> I'm just looking at some of the findings
of that study and one of the surprising
things is it showed that there is a
biological exploration date per se for
the reversal of the heart. Yeah. And
then the heart retains its plasticity,
the ability to remodel itself until the
age of 65. If this intervention had
started after the age of 65, the heart
was too stiff to be physically remodeled
to get that 20 year reversal.
>> Yeah.
>> You have to start in late middle age.
>> Exactly. So midlife is the window of
opportunity for brain health and for
longevity.
>> I didn't realize you could sort of
remodel the heart yourself. That's
interesting.
>> Yeah, you can remodel the heart. And the
heart is amazing. Okay. Because what you
see with the aorta, right? So the aorta
goes up and we've got we've got two
we've got uh the main blood supply for
the brain exist in the vertebral
arteries. Okay? So there's branching off
of the aorta comes from the heart.
Vertebral arteries which supply the
posterior part of the brain and the
cerebellum with blood. And then you've
got the corroted arteries. So one on
each side branching off the aorta which
supply the uh frontal and middle part of
your brain with blood. The brain is the
most vascular rich organ in the entire
body. In times of stress such as
hypertension, okay, that is elevated
blood pressure. We see that we can
actually kill off the tiniest parts of
the blood vessels which are called the
capillaries. You can see the capillaries
up here. They supply even the bloodb
brain barrier. So they supply mainly the
outer cortex of the brain with blood.
When we have elevated blood pressure,
we are starting to kill off those tiny
little capillaries of the brain. Those
capillaries are feeding different
neurons in the brain and also feeding
the bloodb brain barrier. So when we get
breaking off of these, we lose the blood
supply, we lose the oxygenation, we get
um a breakdown of the bloodb brain
barrier itself, which is scary. And we
see that in patients who have got mild
cognitive impairment. You can call it,
you've heard of leaky gut, we can call
it leaky brain. If you have a leaky
brain, what happens eventually is so
your bloodb brain barrier sits like
this. Okay? And there are cells and we
call them parasites for example and
they're bound together by tight
junctions. That's what the bloodb brain
barrier is. It's like a you think of the
bloodb brain barrier as the bouncer of a
nightclub. They are all standing there
like this responsible for who can come
in and who can't. and they don't allow
some molecules to get in. But over time,
when this starts to degrade and become
leaky, they start to spread apart. And
when they do, you can have the passive
diffusion of all these molecules coming
in. And that's really bad for your
brain. So, we want to maintain the
integrity of the bloodb brain barrier by
maintaining the capillary health. We
don't want the capillaries to die.
They're one cell thick. Any type of
damage can damage them and kill them.
hypertension. There was a really great
study. It was called it was actually the
sprint trial and it was it's now the
gold standard for the recommendation of
120 over 80. What's
>> that?
>> So when you have your blood pressure
taken, we get the systolic over
diastolic. And you've probably I don't
know if you take your blood pressure,
but doing your blood pressure every day
is a really great inexpensive and
effective tool for maintaining good
brain health. So you measure your blood
pressure and if you are hypertensive
this is anywhere over
okay systolic over 135
that's when things start to break down
that's when we start to get the
breakdown of those small one cell thick
capillaries. So in this trial, in the
spring trial, what they found was that
when they aggressively manage these
patients and they bring their blood
pressure down, they did it
pharmacologically through something
called an ACE inhibitor. It's a
medication to drive down blood pressure.
When they bring it down
pharmacologically, these patients
preserved their brain gray matter and
their cognitive functions. So we now
have a gold standard. And this is what I
would recommend anybody on Amazon. And
it costs about $25 for a blood an
automatic blood pressure monitor. Do it
every single morning and watch your
blood pressure.
>> And then if it's high, what do I do
about it?
>> Well, outside of pharmarmacology, if we
don't want to take a medication, we want
to get stronger. And we want to do this
via exercise.
Stress is one of the biggest things
driving high blood pressure. manage
stress, manage cortisol, manage chronic
inflammation by way of exercise, sleep,
all of the things that mother nature
gave us.
>> I was just looking at the um the study
that reversed the heart by 20 years and
trying to figure out what exercises they
did. And as you said, the first one was
a highintensity workout, the 4x4.
>> Um then they did a long aerobic
exercise. Again, this is all once a
week. So 60 minutes once a week doing a
longer exercise like it could be hiking
or tennis or cycling. a moderate
intensity workout, 30 minutes where they
did the talk test, you should be able to
break a sweat but still be able to
speak. So that was once a week. And then
lastly, strength training once a week.
So it's really a variety
>> of exercises that caused such a profound
impact on the heart.
>> And I think cardiovascular diseases are
the single biggest killer.
>> Yeah. Cardiovascular disease,
dementia is the number one killer of
women in the UK. The number one
>> really. It's the number one cause of
death in Australia for both men and
women.
>> How does it kill you? Because we all
think about memory loss and stuff like
that, but
>> and so this is the actual devastating
part. We don't die of Alzheimer's
disease specifically. Over time, what
happens is in these patients, you have
to remember Alzheimer's disease is like
endstage cancer. Once you get the
diagnosis, there is no cure. There is no
going back. There is no reversal. you
have the disease and that's the scariest
part. Mild cognitive impairment, you can
slow the progression of that. Like I
said to you, it goes for 20 years. Mild
cognitive impairment, you can slow the
progression of mild cognitive
impairment, but as soon as you get
diagnosed on that awful day that your
mother or your friend gets diagnosed
with Alzheimer's disease, it's a sad
day. And what ends up happening with
these patients is you can die of
esphyxiation. You can die of you. Your
brain loses the signal to swallow. It
loses the signal to maybe you fall
because you've lost balance. It's really
it's a really scary moment, but it's not
like you die of Alzheimer's disease
specifically.
If you were diagnosed with Alzheimer's
disease,
it's an interesting reaction.
[snorts]
>> Because I would have no hope. I think a
a better question is
>> you'd have no hope.
>> If I was diagnosed with Alzheimer's
disease, there is nothing I could do.
>> How would that change
your life and the decisions you make? Or
would it at all? I would aggressively
aggressively exercise. I would monitor
my diet. I would aggressively monitor my
diet and I would potentially have a
ketogenic diet because what we've found
is that during this metabolic crisis
that happens in your brain, okay? Where
you lose the ability to use glucose as
your primary fuel source. So the brain
doesn't know how to use glucose as its
primary fuel source. So it's under
attack. during Alzheimer's
>> during Alzheimer's but also during this
window in of for women as well in the
pmenopause state. So the brain cell when
it's under attack and it can't utilize
glucose effectively and it doesn't have
any energy it starts to think about
survival. It starts to think what can I
do? I'm under attack. So it starts to
break down the myelin sheath. And in
that moment it's actually the
aststerittes they're the supporters of
the brain so of the brain cells. So they
start to think okay let's break down the
myelin sheath from that the astroytes
produce ketone bodies and then the
ketone bodies get shuttled into the
brain and that's how we use uh energy in
the brain. So in that state of metabolic
crisis I would make sure that I am
having a ketone rich diet or I may be
getting exogenous ketones. I would
aggressively exercise. I would
aggressively manage my my lipids. I'd
have a high intake of omega-3 fatty
acids and I would preserve if I could
any form of cognitive function by way of
talking to people by going outside,
socializing, having hard conversations
if I was intact and I could do so. I
would throw tennis balls to the wall.
So on that point of the ketogenic diet,
the reason is because ketones are an
alternative fuel source to glucose.
>> Y
>> and the brain likes ketones.
>> The brain loves ketones and it actually
utilizes them more effectively than
glucose. But glucose is the primary fuel
source for the brain. And here's what's
really interesting uh and devastating if
you will for females during the onset of
pmenopause, right? when we see a decline
in estrogen, right? We see a decline in
estrogen, what happens is a 30%
reduction in brain glucose metabolism.
So, when these receptors start to die
because we don't have uh we don't have a
lot of estrogen circulating in the
bloodstream anymore, what happens? Well,
we can't utilize glucose as effectively.
So during that state, that's when we
start to get the breakdown of the myelin
sheath to use that as uh as ketone
bodies as an alternative brain fuel
source.
>> So do you think women going through
menopause should be
considering a ketogenic diet? Yes, I do
think that I think that women who are
going through pmenopause and who are at
the mercy of this brain energetic crisis
should be adopting if they can a
ketogenic diet. It's one of the best
diets for the brain.
>> I didn't really understand this idea
that during menopause there was a
glucose
deficiency or metabolism problem in the
brain.
>> 30% reduction in brain glucose
metabolism. Is this why women report to
having brain fog and all these kinds of
things?
>> Yeah, absolutely. Because when the brain
can't utilize its fuel source
effectively, what happens? Well,
metabolites start to shift. We don't
sleep properly. Around 60 to 65% of
women in menopause report having a hot
flash or night sweats. It wakes them up
at night. That's also causing cognitive
decline and brain fog. So, I mean, this
graph is pretty shocking.
[clears throat]
>> Um, can you explain what it shows?
>> Oh, this is showing the um estrogen
levels at birth going through all of the
life cycles that a woman will go
through, puberty, pmenopause, and then
eventually menopause. There is one thing
that is certain.
After age, I mentioned earlier being a
woman is the next strongest risk factor
for getting this disease,
>> forgetting [snorts] Alzheimer's.
forgetting Alzheimer's and that largely
lies in our par in our menopausal shift
that occurs the downsizing of estrogen.
However, we do have forms of estrogen
that we can you know supplement with.
>> So I just need to keep the estrogen up.
>> Yeah.
>> Because then the brain health is going
to be up and normal.
>> This is where the controversy lies. Yes
and no. So I want everyone to understand
I am sitting right now. So my entire
doctoral thesis is focused on women and
Alzheimer's disease and I'm Switzerland
right now when it comes to hormone
replacement therapy. That is replacing
your hormones.
>> You're Switzerland.
>> I'm Switzerland. Meaning that there is
no evidence to suggest right now we
don't have largecale randomized control
trials to show that hormone replacement
therapy prevents dementia. So what I
will tell you is this. It is a signal.
It is a supporter. It will help you do
the things that can lower your risk of
dementia. We've seen multiple times that
having hormone replacement therapy can
reduce your risk of getting Alzheimer's
disease by up to 30%. We know that. But
it's not because estrogen alone is
minimizing your risk. It's because when
you have estrogen, it helps get rid of
the hot flashes. It helps with the night
sweats because during menopause when we
actually have a disregulation of the of
estrogen in our brain, what happens in
the hypothalamus which is an area in the
brain that controls our temperature
regulation when we lose the ability to
monitor our temperature for a woman.
What will happen is when she feels the
slightest bit hot, her temperature, you
know, is rising a little bit. The
hypothalamus doesn't know what to do.
So, it signals, I'm super hot. So, it'll
raise your temperature right up, and
that's a hot flash. And then it'll bring
it right down. And as a result, this is
keeping women up at night. And we know
that sleep deprivation is a risk factor
for Alzheimer's disease. Of course, it
is. compounding sleep deprivation will
accumulate amaloid beta in your brain.
So if we can replace if we can use
hormone replacement therapy as a signal
and as a support to help us sleep at
night then that's a good thing. Another
thing estrogen is anabolic to muscle.
>> What does that mean?
>> It means that it helps with muscle
protein synthesis.
>> Oh it helps me make muscle.
>> Yeah. We've got estrogen receptors on
our bone. We've got estrogen receptors
on our muscle. So if estrogen is
anabolic to muscle, if estrogen helps
with muscle protein synthesis, if
estrogen helps with bone mineral
density, then replacing estrogen during
that menopause state is going to help us
with all of the risk factors of
Alzheimer's disease.
>> So when does estrogen I mean it really
in this image drops off a cliff
>> and Yeah. And it varies. So it tends to
generally happen at around 45 years old
as an average and that that pmenopause
stage lasts around 10 years
>> but it starts going down on this graph
at about 30.
>> It starts to go down and everyone's
different. Okay, you can have a woman in
her late 30s go into pmenopause or the
general age is around 42 to 45. Most
OBGYNS that I've spoken to say that you
need to start checking in with your
doctor at around 40 years old to check
for this.
>> So, do you thinking about my fiance now,
do you think that
someone like her should go on hormone
replacement therapy at like 40?
>> Well, so that's the that's the big
question. That's the elephant in the
room. Should you go on hormone
replacement therapy or should you not?
And that's definitely a conversation
between you and your physician. However,
we've got largecale studies right now to
show that we don't have to be afraid of
hormone replacement therapy. And without
going too deep into the weeds, there was
a massive study that was done, the women
women's health initiative, that scared
women out of taking hormone replacement
therapy in fear
>> of getting breast cancer. Correct. We
went from having 40% of women on hormone
replacement therapy to just 4% of women
on hormone replacement therapy. We know
that even at the onset of menopause, a
woman's risk of having a heart related
event triples. A woman's risk of getting
Alzheimer's
disease increases. So there is something
to posit here about the benefits of
hormone replacement therapy that we
still haven't yet studied.
>> Will you do hormone replacement therapy?
>> I definitely will.
>> And what kind of hormone?
>> And look, so this is really interesting.
So um this was given to me by a friend
and there's this is the um this is the
capsule. So this is estradile and
progesterone. Okay, so progesterone is
that one that's going to help you sleep
at night. This one here is vaginal
estrogen. So, this is a cream that
actually gets uh you know, depending on
how it is, it can get inserted and the
vaginal estrogen apparently if you put
it on your face is probably the best
form of skin care that you could ever
have. Yeah, we have estrogen receptors
all over our tissues, including our
skin. These are estradiol inserts. So,
that's not the cream itself, but if you
get vaginal estrogen in the form of a
cream, you can put it on your face and
it can help with skin elasticity,
collagen, uh dermal thickness. This is
why I'm actually most excited about it.
>> So, I mean, is this are these the only
ways that one can do hormone?
>> No, there's also um a patch, and that's
what most women are opting in for. The
transmal patch
>> when the time comes.
>> Uh I will probably do the the the patch.
>> Why? because it's the the easiest.
That's the one that um I've researched
the most. Uh I'm not afraid of hormone
replacement therapy in the slightest.
You do have to, you know, everyone has
to check with their doctor, but I
definitely think that this is going to
be one thing that is going to help with
the Alzheimer's disease crisis that is
occurring.
>> Go ahead.
>> I mentioned earlier plaques, right? So a
lot of people ask well what
distinguishes Alzheimer's disease from
the rest of the dementias and it comes
down to two proteins amaloid beta and
tow protein and here's where it gets
really interesting and actually dates
back to 1901 the first ever Alzheimer's
disease patient Augusta she was 52 years
old and she went to the hospital her and
her husband went complaining of
difficulties of word finding
word fluency and she couldn't remember
where she put her keys and her husband
said she is delirious and Augusta told
the doctor on board he was a
psychiatrist his name was Eloise
Alzheimer she said to him and I quote I
don't know who I am anymore
as I mentioned this disease robs you of
who you are in 1906 066 August busted
died and that was the first ever patient
to be recorded of having Alzheimer's
disease and so postmortem they cut her
brain open and they found that she had
these plaques in her brain and they
didn't really know they didn't really
understand what it was but that was the
first ever induction of this disease in
society and ever since then ever since
then we are still trying to tackle this
disease in the 2000s We had this notion
that Alzheimer's disease was the amaloid
cascade hypothesis. Meaning that great
Alzheimer's disease means when you get a
head full of amaloid, this toxic protein
that builds up. So we were demonizing
this protein. We were demonizing this
peptide protein that builds up in the
head. And so then came the medications,
okay? In the form of IV drugs. So you go
to the hospital, you get an IV in the
promise that it will clear out amaloid.
Great, we've got a cure. But what they
found was that when they were taking out
the amaloid in these brains, they were
taking with them brain tissue and
causing microhemorrhages.
And in some patients, it was resulting
in death.
So we now know that the problem here
isn't amaloid. In fact, amalloid is a
antimicrobial peptide. So, amaloid is
actually a good thing. Amalloid beta is
a good thing because it protects the
brain cells. Now, here's what happens.
We have this beautiful process during
sleep that occurs when we get into deep
sleep. We activate the glimpmphatic
system. Okay? So, the glimpmphatic
system comes from the word gals. Gal
cells. We have gleal cells in the brain.
They sit outside of the neurons and this
is what uh is responsible for immunity.
They're our chief um immune response
cell. During deep sleep they shrink and
when they shrink all of this amaloid
beta that's floating around in the
cerebral spinal fluid gets washed out.
So it's like a washing machine that
occurs in your brain. Right? But what
tends to happen in Alzheimer's patients
is they don't get a chance to wash out
the amaloid. What happens in pmenopause
and menopause due to the hot flashes,
you don't get to get into deep sleep
because you're having a fragmented sleep
because you're waking up due to hot
flashes and night sweats. So that is
what's do that is what's causing the
buildup of amaloid. Now stick with me.
We've got another protein that is a
hallmark of Alzheimer's disease. It's
towel protein and towel lives in the
axon of the cell. The one that I said is
covered in the myelin sheath and what
happens under times of stress. What
happens is this tow protein
phosphorolates.
So it breaks off and basically tow
protein stabilizes the microtubules.
Okay, imagine these railro road tracks
in the axon, okay? Just going up and
down the axon.
>> The axon's in the in the cell or in the
brain.
>> And so the the the brain cell itself,
the neuron is the neuron cell body and
the axon is like the trunk of the tree.
>> Okay.
>> Right. So holding up the tree are
microtubules and those microtubules are
bound by tow proteins. The the tow
proteins keep the microtubules intact.
So the trunk of the tree is stabilized
and it sits there. Why does it need to
be stabilized? Because that's how speed
of thought travels. Information
processing speed travels up there. When
the tow protein phosphorolates,
it starts to form tangles. They're
called neuroiary tangles. So that
happens in the axon. And when all these
tangles clump together, we get the
collapse of this axon, the collapse of
these microtubules.
So we're not just having a cascade of
environmental disaster inside the
cerebral spinal fluid of the brain and
inside the brain, outside the cells.
We've also got this cascade happening
inside the cell body itself. So the
brain is under attack inside the cell
and outside the cell.
>> Why? Why exactly? Why? Why does this
happen? Because of how we treat our
brains.
>> Because of how we treat our brains.
>> Yes. The reason why your brain is
hyperphosphorilated and the reason why
these tower proteins are
hyperphosphorilated is because of many
things. One is we have seen time and
time again that we have estrogen
receptors
that are on in the brain cell themselves
in the axon. So when we don't have
adequate estrogen, estrogen actually is
so smart what it is doing, it's blocking
an enzyme that is responsible for
phosphorolating
the towel. So if we don't have the
estrogen there,
then the towel, the enzyme is there to
phosphorolate the towel and break it
down and cause these neuropiary tangles.
But let's just say you're a man and you
don't have you don't need the testo you
don't need the estrogen there. Although
testosterone is neuroprotective.
Testosterone actually aromatizes into
estrogen which is why you actually have
an extra added protection in your life.
Um
what else causes this? Well stress.
>> You're talking about sleep there.
>> Yeah. So sleep is, I think, by far the
most underrated
Alzheimer's disease prevention tool that
we have. It's underrated because
we have been doing it all our lives and
we think that we can just go to sleep
and the magic happens. But I think now
in 2026, we actually need to train for
sleep. So during deep sleep we activate
the glimpmphatic system and sadly a
large proportion of us aren't getting
into deep sleep. [snorts] So sleep is uh
one of the reasons.
>> How do you sleep?
>> Yeah, I sleep I make sure I sleep 7 and
1/2 hours a night.
>> This message is brought to you by Apple
Card. It's a great time to apply for an
Apple Card. You'll love earning
unlimited daily cash back on every
purchase. That includes 3% daily cash
when you buy the latest iPhone, AirPods,
and Apple Watch at Apple. Through this
special referral offer, when you get a
new Apple Card, you can earn bonus daily
cash. To qualify, you must apply at
apple.co/gety
daily cash. Apple card issued by Goldman
Sachs Bank USA, Salt Lake City branch.
Offer may not be available everywhere.
Terms and limitations apply. All I had
to do was brain dump. Imagine if you had
someone with you at all times that could
take the ideas you have in your head,
synthesize them with AI to make them
sound better and more grammatically
correct and write them down for you.
This is exactly what Whisper Flow is in
my life. It is this thought partner that
helps me explain what I want to say. And
it now means that on the go, when I'm
alone in my office, when I'm out and
about, I can respond to emails and Slack
messages and WhatsApps and everything
across all of my devices just by
speaking. I love this tool. And I
started talking about this on my behind
thes scenes channel a couple of months
back and then the founder reached out to
me and said we're seeing a lot of people
come to our tour because of you. So we'd
love to be a sponsor. We'd love you to
be an investor in the company. And so I
signed up for both of those offers and
I'm now an investor and a huge partner
in a company called Whisperflow. You
have to check it out. Whisper Flow is
four times faster than typing. So if you
want to give it a try, head over to
whisperflow.ai/doac
to get started for free. And you can
find that link to Whisperflow in the
description below.
A lot of people struggle with sleep and
um they've just kind of gotten used to
it. I hear this from friends of mine
that will say, you know, I'm a bad
sleeper. I'll sleep for 5 hours. And
they kind of have just gotten used to
it. Do you think that's okay?
>> No.
And they will pay for this in their 60s
and 70s.
>> How do you know?
>> Because I know that just one night of
sleep deprivation is raising your risk
of amaloid beta by at least 4 to 5%.
just one night.
>> So you can imagine the accumulation of
this. Not only that, we know that you're
interrupting with the hormones that are
responsible for hunger and society. We
know for hunger and satiety. We know
that you're increasing your risk of type
2 diabetes with um sleep deprivation.
But not just that, we also see that this
compound effect can't be reversed.
Meaning that a lot of people think, I'll
just sleep for 6 hours a night and then
just bank on it on the weekend. But
sadly, that's not how our brain works.
It's not like debt that we can repay to
the bank.
>> I heard from Matthew Walker the other
day though that we can save it up. He
said um he said you can't make up for
lost sleep.
>> Exactly.
>> But if on Monday I've got something
where I know I'm going to be deprived.
He says on the weekends like Saturday
and Sunday, if I got a huge amount of
sleep, it's kind of like
>> I can use that. Yeah, it's kind of like
Yeah, it's kind of like the reserve.
Yeah, actually I do this. I do long haul
flights. I'll be it like 6 hours between
LA and New York, but also to Australia.
And so if I know I'm going on a long
haul flight, I'll bank on my sleep for
about a week leading up to that cuz I
know I'm going to be sleepd deprived on
the plane. So, if you were one of those
people that struggles with sleep, that's
listening right now and they're slightly
concerned that, you know, you talked
about this um glimpmphatic system which
sort of comes out at night and cleans up
the brain
>> and they're hearing, you know, [__] my
glimpy system isn't going to be optimal
if I'm not sleeping.
>> If that was you, and for whatever
reason, you start sleeping poorly.
>> Mhm.
>> What would you do about it?
>> I would get really serious about
examining my lifestyle the day before.
So, this generally involves two things.
You have to ask yourself, are you having
trouble falling asleep or are you having
trouble staying asleep? A lot of
women report trouble falling asleep,
meaning they've got a racing mind. Men,
too, they've got this racing mind. They
can't, you know, just stop that default
mode network and the the racing thoughts
that happen. That's one thing.
And then there's the I can't stay asleep
meaning that uh I'm waking up due to
heat. I'm waking up because uh I'm
stressed and I'm having bad dreams.
There's all different reasons as to why
you wake up. So for the person who is
having trouble falling asleep at night,
I would strongly recommend
introducing a supplement called GABA,
which is gamma aminoic acid. It's our
chief inhibitory neurotransmitter.
And when you have this, it really helps
stabilize all those thoughts. It helps
with erasing mind and it can help calm
you down at night. The next thing I'll
do is I will think about what I'm
eating. Actually, it turns out that um
eating starchy vegetables, something
that's going to make you like, you know,
sweet potatoes for example, it's going
to have a better benefit uh backloading
uh your carbs at night for helping you
sleep. If you start training for sleep
as if sleep is your marathon and start
preparing for that at 8:00 p.m. at
night, getting off, you know, don't
email, don't have any hard
conversations, don't watch anything
crazy at night, you'll settle your mind
down, you'll settle your nervous system
down, [snorts]
but where I think uh most of the
optimization occurs is when you're
actually in sleep. I would also work on
um sleep regulation. So, what we know is
that in order to fall asleep and stay
asleep, our core body temperature needs
to drop at least 2. And I'm doing this
with a temperature controlled mattress
cuz it's working on thermal regulation.
A lot of people who don't have that can
do uh several things like sleeping with
their feet outside of the sheets or turn
turning the the air conditioning on, the
thermostat on to cooling the room, to
cooling down your body temperature, core
body temperature. One thing that um you
can supplement with is glycine, which I
think is amazing because it helps with
sleep by way of temperature regulation.
It can bring down your core body
temperature. And in fact, and I don't
know too much about the mechanism behind
this, glycine itself has one of the
greatest longevity benefits for
improving lifespan. So, taking glycine
can also help with that. Now, in terms
of the person who is having trouble
staying asleep,
>> what about this one? You don't talk
about the um the old ashwagandha.
>> Oh, yeah. Ashwagandha is great. Okay.
Ashwagandha is going to help you with
stress. And you've got here Ashwagandha
rodeiola. So, what they both are, they
are adaptogens.
And basically an adaptogen is great
because it it goes in and it adapts to
what is happening in your body. So let's
just say you have elevated cortisol. And
this tends to happen you know during
different cycles during the day mainly
during the uh daytime when we wake up
where cortisol levels are at its peak
but it can also happen at night. Having
this can actually stabilize that
cortisol because it can go in and
combine to cortisol and bring it down.
likely if something is not elevated and
it's low, it can bring it up. So, it's
really good. It's an adaptogen and
studies show that you can actually take
this three times a day and you won't
feel fatigued. It doesn't disrupt
anything and it pairs really well with
caffeine, for example. So does
theineine. So, this is actually a really
great um adjunct to your supplement
stack. And you really talk about how you
need to sort of warm up to warm down or
warm up to go to sleep.
>> Oh, yeah.
>> Starting at like 7:00 p.m.
>> Yeah. Starting at like 8:00 p.m. And
that's in line with circadian rhythm and
circadian biology. You want to try and
when it comes to sleep and your
circadian rhythm, you kind of want to
mimic the sun and mother nature. And
when does the sun start to go down? It
starts to go down at around 8:00 p.m.
depending on where you are in the world.
And
when this happens, we also get the
natural release of I love that you're
taking that, by the way. You must be
stressed right now. You get the natural
release of melatonin. So melatonin is
that sleepy hormone that gets released
in response to darkness. This may also
be another reason why somebody somebody
is having trouble falling asleep and
staying asleep. So we want to get the
natural release of that. So, these bio
hacks that occur right now, sleeping
with our red light mask on, dimming the
lights. Look, dimming the lights is
great. Um, I've actually replaced all of
my light bulbs um at home with in my
bedroom as well with red light bulbs.
So, I'm getting um I'm getting rid of
the blue light, the junk light. I'm
replacing it with red light to help down
regulate the nervous system. Yes, I do
wear blue light blocking goggles or
glasses, I should say. Do I think that
they're providing an immediate and huge
benefit? I don't know. But they could
have a minor benefit there. So warming
down involves doing these things that
are going to help you downregulate your
nervous system so you can fall asleep
faster.
>> Sticking on supplements for a second.
Omega-3.
>> Yes.
>> Um I've got some omega-3 here. I've got
two of them here. Mhm.
>> But when I brought both of them out, you
said that I've got to be quite careful
about what brand I buy, but also
something about temperature.
>> So, by far out of all of the
supplements, omega3 is probably the only
one that you have to make sure that you
look at the supplement label for there.
There was this study that was done that
showed that around 95%
of the most popular omega-3 supplements
in the US, and there was about 85 of
them that were tested, exceeded the
normal oxidation level, meaning that
these pills, because they're omega-3
fatty acids, they come from fish oil,
they are oil, they can become rancid and
oxidized. And they usually do this when
they're in a heated environment. Here
are the here are the rules of thumbs.
One, you want to look for a manufacturer
that is highly credible and that is
certified.
>> Certified.
>> Yeah. So NSF certified. So it's an
external governing uh board that
certifies them on, you know, everything
heavy metals. They make sure that the um
oxidation levels are met and they make
sure that, you know, what's in the
capsule is actually in the capsule.
That's another thing that is scary. The
supplement industry is highly
unregulated. And I treat my omega-3s the
same way I treat my olive oil. You want
to get oil that is sourced in the area
that you are. We're in California right
now. So, you might want to find an
omega-3 that is sourced in California.
>> Do I want to put it in the fridge?
>> You want to put it in the fridge the
moment that you get it.
>> Really? Yeah.
>> Why does nobody talk about that?
>> I'm not sure. But, um, it's just the
same as olive oil. You don't want the
olive oil to become rancid, so you don't
leave it near the near the stove. You
want to put it in a cupboard away from
the stove.
>> And these are good for the brain.
>> Oh, omega-3 is by far uh one of the most
potent stimulus that you could have for
the brain. They help with cell membrane
fluidity. So, where your cells meet
neuron to neuron, they create something
called a syninnapse. And in order for
that to occur, we have a massive influx
of all of these neurotransmitters,
dopamine, serotonin. We've also got
calcium and potassium. And these help
our brain cells communicate. Okay? We
want to make sure that our membranes,
the cell membranes are fluid and they
glide in order to help with that
synaptic transmission. Another thing
that they do is
they are comparable to an NSAID, an
anti-inflammatory
medication.
These have massive anti-inflammatory
effects. In fact, I think that these
have the safety profile of an FDA
approved drug and there's only benefits
from it. There's no side effects from
it. Uh not just that 60% of our brain is
made of fat.
70% of that is made of DHA. And DHA
comes from omega-3 fatty acids. So why
do I not want to replace my brain or the
fat in my brain with what it's made of?
And that's what you do when you have
omega-3 fatty acids. In fact, there's
been several trials um to show that
omega-3 fatty acids are most beneficial
and most effective for mild cognitive
impairment patients,
people who have the APOE4 gene and
people who have got Alzheimer's disease
because when I told you that our we get
the breakdown of the bloodb brain
barrier, those parasites on the bloodb
brain barrier require DHA. In fact,
there's a transporter on the outside of
our brain that allows the um that allows
the DHA to come in and get into the
brain.
>> And I know you're a big fan of vitamin D
as well because there's been some very
encouraging studies done there.
>> Vitamin D is phenomenal. We have vitamin
D receptors all over our brain brain
stem and and they're abundantly
found in the hippocampus and the memory
centers of our brain. And there was this
act there was actually a study done on
centinarians in China.
>> Centinarians?
>> Yeah. Those who lived to 100, but it was
done in women. And they showed that the
women who preserved their cognitive
functions and who didn't get Alzheimer's
disease had high levels of vitamin D. So
they weren't vitamin D deficient. In
fact, being vitamin D deficient can
increase your risk of all cause dementia
by 40%.
likely being having a high level of
vitamin D which is around 60 nanogs per
deciliter can lower your risk of getting
Alzheimer's disease by around 80%.
>> And then we have this white powder in
front of me.
>> You've got a big smile on your face.
I do because there is just so much
benefit to this. Depending on which
brand you've bought, of course, but I
can't say enough about creatine. I have
my parents on creatine. They're 71 years
old. I've got my dad on highdose
creatine. I've got my mother on lowdose
creatine. It's the most widely studied
supplement on the market.
>> I've never seen you this excited. I'm so
excited because I think that this is a
really cheap and effective way to get
everything you want from both your
physiology, an upgrade on your
physiology and your neurohysiology.
So, let's actually talk about creatine
because I know it gets a lot of air
time, but women and men are still scared
of it. And they're scared of it for two
reasons. One, they're scared it's going
to cause kidney damage. And two, it's
they're scared their hair is going to
fall out. And I'm going to address both
of those fears. But first, let's talk
about what it is. So, creatine is a
naturally occurring molecule. We it's we
get we produce around 2 to three grams
of creatine per day. Gets secreted from
a bit from the brain, but a lot from the
liver. And 2 to three grams a day is
great, but it's not enough. So, we have
to supplement with it. And all through
the 90s and all through the 2000s,
people were supplementing with five
grams a day. That is this scoop here. 5
g of creatine per day. Now that we're
getting more uh rigorous with our brain
health studies, we have found that
creatine has enormous benefits for the
brain. But here's the problem. When you
have 5 g of creatine, you're saturating
the muscles. Okay, remember the muscles
are so hungry, so they get first dibs
and they take up all of that creatine.
So then there's none left for the brain.
We also lose a bit of the
bioavailability when the creatine goes
into the brain. It crosses the bloodb
brain barrier, but when it goes into the
brain, we lose some of it. So, we have
to supplement with more than 5 g. And
one of the studies that changed my
thinking came out last year. It was the
first ever pilot study done on
Alzheimer's disease patients. You're
talking about patients whose brains are
under attack. They're in an energetic
crisis. They cannot produce energy
effectively. ATP is all skewed. Brain
glucose metabolism is skewed. They don't
remember left from right. Cognitive
functions are declined. They put them on
at 20 g of creatine per day,
>> which is how much? I mean
>> that well actually that is four of this.
So you want to go one and I don't know
if they did this all at once. That's
two. Or if they did it like me over four
separate intervals throughout the day.
There we go.
>> That's a lot of
>> That's a lot. Which is why you probably
want to have this skewed throughout the
day, which is what I did. I had 20 grams
today. I had five grams in the morning,
five midm morning, and then I think I
had 10 all at once before I got here. So
that is a lot for all at once. And what
they found was that these patients not
only preserved their cognitive
functions, but they had more energy and
they were able to exercise more. And it
blew my mind that it does not matter how
old you are. It doesn't discriminate
based on gender. Creatine doesn't
discriminate based on age. It doesn't
discriminate based on weight. It doesn't
discriminate based on pathology or
disease states or ethnicity.
It is just there. It is there to support
you. It's the most widely studied
supplement on the market.
>> And it's all risk.
>> It's all reward. There is no risk. It's
helping with cell energy metabolism. So
basically, it's helping ATP
create energy.
>> So if you're someone that is low energy,
you should definitely be having
creatine. I don't care who you are, you
should definitely be having creatine.
>> People with brain fog and
>> yeah, people with brain fog, you know, I
think one of the greatest benefits are
men who [clears throat] are in football,
football players, you can actually, it's
actually a protective molecule. So, what
studies has shown is that at high doses
of creatine, around 30 grams a day, it
can protect you against insults. insults
meaning you take a hit to the head like
a concussion.
>> H [clears throat]
>> it can protect your brain against a
concussion. It can protect your g brain
against a stroke. It can protect your
brain from stress. The best thing about
creatine is that it works in the
background of stress. I think that's
where most that's where you'll get most
of the benefits from.
>> After hearing so much about creatine on
this podcast, I started recommending it
to all of the people in my life. There's
one particular person actually that's
probably out out there in my house at
the moment who had gone through uh
cancer treatments.
>> Yeah.
>> And had survived cancer treatments and
in their words wasn't the same on the
other side of the cancer treatments. And
I talked to her about um creatine and
she said to me the other day she I think
the exact quote was
>> I feel like I've got my life back
>> because it's she's been taking creatine
every single day for the last [snorts]
I'd say 5 months or so.
>> It's funny you said that because just
recently in the last two weeks uh this
study was done to show the anti-cancer
effects of creatine. And if my memory
serves clear, they uh they dosed it at
uh they dosed it at 0.36 g per kilogram
of body weight. So if you are a 70 kilo
person, if my mathematics is correct,
you're looking at around 25 g of
creatine per day that can have the
effects, the anti-cancer effects.
>> So the the study you're referring to,
I'll put up on the screen as well for
anyone that wants to see it. It's um the
NANS 2025 study, which is a major study
involving over 25,000 adults, found a
linear negative association between
dietary creatine and cancer prevalence.
For every standard deviation increase in
dietary creatine intake, the risk of
having cancer decreased by roughly 5% to
18% depending on the demographic.
>> That is wild.
This protective association was
strongest in adults over the age of 50,
suggesting that as we age, maintaining
higher creatine levels might be more
critical for cellular health and immune
surveillance.
>> Well, if [clears throat] you think about
life and think about energy, um we need
energy to survive. We need energy to
fight off infections. We need energy to
fight off stress, preserve our normal
normal bodily functions. So when we are
at the mercy of a low energy crisis, we
can't fight off tumor cells, we we can't
fight off these uh debilitating
diseases. So it actually makes sense
that with more energy and with more
functional energy, meaning like if our
cells can function better, it makes
sense that you can see a reduction in
cancer incidents likely you can see a
reduction in Alzheimer's disease
incidents. when I said that creatine
works in the background of stress. Also,
there was uh there's been phenomenal
research to show that you can
basically creatine your way out of sleep
deprivation. If you've had a uh if
you've had a a long night and you you're
sleep deprived, maybe you slept four,
five, 6 hours, you're sleepd deprived,
you can take uh you can take highdose
creatine in the form of around 15 to 20
grams a day and you can reverse the
negative effects associated with that
sleep deprivation.
>> Does it matter what time you take the
creatine?
>> It doesn't matter what time you take the
creatine. It doesn't degrade in hot
water. it uh you can take it any time
throughout the day and it doesn't matter
whether you're taking it right before
exercise, during exercise, after
exercise, it works phenomenally. Some
people uh researchers are now uh
wondering if taking it at night before
bed helps with sleep performance and I
think that that's a really exciting
area. But the one thing that I want to
tell everybody because a lot of people
are scared of this biioarker called
creatinine meaning that
>> oh my doctor said that to me.
>> Yeah. So meaning that you've got a a
high creatinine level. And this is a
marker of it's one marker of kidney
function. But this is where I find it uh
really invaluable. And this is where a
lot of the nonsense comes around on
Instagram and social media. A lot of
people say, "Well, I had so much
creatine that my doctor told me to get
off it because my creatinine levels were
high." But creatinine levels are high
during times of stress, during times of
intense physical activity. Uh, and also
people who have a lot of muscle mass,
>> higher muscle mass, that's you have
higher creatinine levels. What you want
to test a greater marker of kidney
function and GFR
is cyatin C. So all you have to ask,
it's really easy. Ask your doctor, could
I please get cyatin C in my blood work?
And if that is elevated and without not
within normal range, then maybe get off
creatine. But right now, I cannot see
any reason as to not have creatine every
single day. I think every single person,
no matter what age you are, everybody
should be supplementing with creatine.
Now, there was this uh recent study that
came out on menopausal women and it was
a really small study. It was a
randomized control trial and they split
women into four groups and these were
permenopausal women. They split them
into lowd dose creatine where I think
they were having 750 mg a day, medium
dose which was around 1.5 g a day.
[snorts] Then they had them supplement
with a range of both creatine
monohydrate and creatine hydrochloride.
This was a hydrochloride creatine study.
And then there was a placebo group. What
they found was a very small study, very
small group. What they found was that
those in the medium range having the 1.5
had substantial increases in their mood
and their cognitive functions. So
creatine is now being explored in
females across the lifespan as it
relates to permenopause, pregnancy,
menopause, and dementia. So there's just
there it's it's it's phenomenal.
The only thing I want to point out, what
you want to look for when it comes to
creatine are two things when it comes to
manufacturing standards. You want to
look A, has it been NSF certified? And
B,
you want to look for is it Creapure? And
that's the gold standard of creatine and
it comes from Germany and a lot. So the
one that you've got there, I can tell
it's not Creapure.
>> Excuse me.
>> I know my creatine. How can you tell
what it is by looking at it?
>> I can just tell. I can I I I bet you a
million dollars that it is the brand
that I think it is because it's got this
powdered icing sugar substance. If it
was pure gold standard Creapure, it
would be gritty. The reason why it's
like this is because a lot of
manufacturers want to add these
different agents in there in order for
it to mix well. This probably mixes
really well. A lot of uh people also
complain of feeling uh GI distress when
they take it. And all I have to say is
that's not a reason to stop taking it.
Maybe take two grams at a time, maybe
take three grams at a time, but don't
stop taking it.
>> What do you test for with your own
health and how frequently do you test?
>> I test every 3 to four months.
>> What do you test?
>> Oh, I do everything. Um [clears throat]
Oh, I've I I just did um lab work. uh
December 15th, the day before my
birthday. I do it, you know, around that
age. But every year, funnily enough, I
test my biological age.
>> What is your biological age?
>> It came back as 22.
>> Okay. What's the most important test
they don't typically do that you think
everybody should be doing?
>> Lipoprotein little a raises your risk of
having a heart related event or raises
your risk of getting cardiovascular
disease, but it's hereditary. And then
for for dementia,
>> this is a really exciting part at least
in the US. We now have a predictable way
of picking up on mild cognitive
impairment and picking up on these
Alzheimer's hallmarks. Tao protein, PTA
217, it's called on blood work and
amaloid beta. So we can now pick up on
this with 90% accuracy of a PET scan.
>> What are those cards over there?
[laughter]
These are here to test your processing
speed.
>> Pink.
>> So,
>> it says pink on it.
>> Yeah. So, this is actually a great
measure of brain function. Your brain
processes visual information 15 times
faster than written words. And so, this
is going to test your uh brain function.
Okay.
>> So, what I want you to do is you're
going to see the color.
>> Yeah.
>> I want you to actually say the color of
the card, not the word.
>> Okay. Let me just program my brain. Say
the color, not the word. Okay. Are you
ready?
>> Green,
orange,
yellow, green,
green,
orange, yellow,
pink, orange, green.
>> Now, let's do the reverse. I want you to
say the words.
>> Wait, let me just [sighs]
Okay. Yellow, blue, green, black,
purple.
brown.
>> Okay, so you're good.
>> Thank you. Let's do it to Jack. Jack,
you come sit in the J. [laughter]
>> You caught him off guard and he hasn't
got creepy. And that's behind
>> there. Grabs a creep.
>> He It's an unfair advantage.
[laughter]
>> Okay, you ready?
>> Wait. So, what am I doing?
>> Just say the color of the card.
>> Okay, just the color of the card. Yeah.
Okay. Ready?
>> Green. Uh, orange, pink, yellow,
yellow.
Yeah. Orange,
pink.
>> Now, let's rolls reverse. I want you to
say what's on the card itself. So, just
read it.
>> Okay. Brown, purple, pink,
green,
black, yellow.
>> Okay. So, now we're going to test it
even more. That was the starting one.
Not good.
>> Not too bad.
>> That was not too bad. So, I want you
This actually involves us standing up
and using a tennis ball. So, we're going
to train your visual cortex, which sits
at the back here in the occipital lobe.
We're going to train your um processing
speed, your reaction time, your hand eye
coordinations. One of the best exercises
that you can do, physical exercises, is
actually hand eye coordination drills.
Tennis, racket sports. But I'm going to
show you what 5 minutes a day can do for
your cognitive reserve and your brain
performance just using a tennis ball and
an eye [snorts] patch.
>> Okay. So, [clears throat]
>> first things first,
>> I'm going to give you this tennis ball.
Yeah.
>> And for the whole time, I want you to
throw the ball with an overhand grip.
>> Oh, like this?
>> Yep.
>> Okay.
>> So, I want you to just throw it with the
right arm and catch with the right arm.
>> Over. I mean, what's this one?
>> Underarm.
>> I'm just checking the wall. Okay. Okay.
So, like this.
>> So, you might want to move back where
the chair is. Okay. No, you would
>> cut that. Cut that out.
Good. So now throw with the right and
catch with the left and alternate.
>> Yep.
>> Okay.
>> You've got it. So what we're doing,
we're engaging almost all the executive
functions. Now you've got hand. You
should be able to do this for a minute.
Okay. Okay.
>> Now we're going to make it even harder.
It's like placing weight as well. Well,
I I'm not going to do the one with the
eye patch. I'll do the next one. Okay.
So, basically what you want to do, and
if you do it with a black ball, it's
actually Oh, even better.
So, now we're going to make it a bit
hard and a bit neurally demanding. We're
going to put an eye patch on you, which
is really going to block out like 50% of
the vision. [snorts]
>> Okay. Which eye?
>> Any eye.
>> Let's do the left one.
>> Now, let's see how many you can do. I
think you we counted around eight
before. a pirate.
>> I just need you to look at [laughter]
>> what? Wait, this is not flattering.
>> Okay,
>> let's go.
>> Oh, that's so different.
>> Yeah. [clears throat]
>> Wow. This feels significantly harder.
>> I know. Let's go.
>> This feels No, this feels like really
hard. Let me just double check. [__]
hell.
>> That's That's really That's so hard.
This is
>> There you go. You've got it.
>> Joking.
Okay, let's alternate now. Left hand,
right hand,
>> left hand, right around like this.
>> Yeah,
>> you're training your visual system to
work under load and under stress. So,
when you do this,
>> I'm interrupting you.
>> No, it's okay.
>> You got it. You got it. You got it.
Good. Good. Good. And then to even make
it even harder. Okay.
>> Stand on your right foot.
>> Yeah.
>> And put your other foot. There you go.
>> Or on one leg. Yep. Standing on one leg
is now engaging the cerebellum.
>> Okay,
>> we're getting spatial awareness. Let's
go. Posture.
>> Left, right, left, right.
>> Yep.
>> Oh [music] my gosh.
>> You got it.
>> I want to see you do it
>> with the eye patch on.
>> Yeah.
>> Wow.
I mean, I can be great. My eyelashes
have gone now. It's okay. We can AI that
out.
>> This actually looks great.
>> Mhm. [clears throat]
>> Okay, we're ready.
Well, I blame my nails. I blame my
nails. Let's do it.
>> Okay. [laughter]
>> It's hard.
>> It's so hard.
>> And so, what is this doing? It's
>> This is engaging executive functions,
processing speed, hand eye coordination.
>> And you did this with NBA players. I did
this with NBA players to improve uh
their executive functions, decrease
their reaction time,
>> and this will this will change my brain
if I do this frequently.
>> Not just that, but you're also improving
cognitive reserve. You're building new
connections between the brain cells.
You're strengthening neural networks and
you're doing something incredible.
You know, every once in a while you come
across a product that has such a huge
impact on your life that you'd probably
describe it as a gamecher. And I would
say for about 35 to 40% of my team, they
would currently describe this product
that I have in front of me called Ketone
IQ, which you can get at ketone.com,
as a game changer. But the reason I
became a coowner of this company and the
reason why they they now are a sponsor
of this podcast is because one day when
I came to work there was a box of this
stuff sat on my desk. I had no idea what
it was. Lily in my team says that this
company have been in touch. So I went
upstairs tried it and quite frankly the
rest is history in terms of my focus, my
energy levels, how I feel, how I work,
how productive I am. Game changer. So if
you want to give it a try, visit
ketone.com/stephven
for 30% off. You'll also get a free gift
with your second shipment. And now you
can find Keton IQ at Target stores
across the United States where your
first shot is completely free of charge.
If there's anything we need, it is
connection. Especially in the world
we're living in today. And that is
exactly why we created these
conversation cards. Because on this
show, when I sit here with my guests and
have those deep, intimate conversations,
this remarkable thing happens time and
time again. We feel deeply connected to
each other. At the end of every episode,
the guest I'm interviewing leaves a
question for the next guest, and we've
turned them into these conversation
cards. And we've added these twist cards
to make your conversations even more
interesting. And there are so many more
twists along the way with the
conversation cards. This is the brand
new edition. And for the first time
ever, I've added to the pack this gold
card, which is an exclusive question
from me. But I'm only putting the gold
cards in the first run of conversation
cards. So get yours now before the
limited edition gold cards are all gone.
Head to the link in the description
below.
>> So doing hard things is what is going to
improve brain function over the
lifespan. Doing hard things tells your
brain that you can do hard things.
Meaning have you ever heard of this um
brain area a little area in the brain
called the anterior mid singular
>> cortex? Yes, I have.
>> What do you know about it?
>> I'll let you say it.
>> Well, it's shown that it's larger in
what we call super ages and people who
age really well and who can uh withhold
a lot of uh cognitive capacity and it's
really profound in people who can diet
well. It gets bigger when we do hard
things. So, when we do really hard
things, this area in the brain gets
bigger. And basically
what that is, it's reserve for when life
gets hard. It means it basically tells
your brain that no matter what happens,
no matter what event comes my way, I
have the ability to go in, welcome it,
and push through it no matter how hard
it's going to be. When you give up or
when you don't do hard things, this
little area doesn't grow. It doesn't get
bigger. So doing these neural activating
uh drills that we just did, going to the
gym and pushing well above your
threshold and pushing really hard is
going to help uh grow this little area
of the brain.
>> And they call this the willpower muscle.
>> The willpower. This is why I think that
um when people go out to set their goals
during the year and they say, "I'm going
to lose 20 pounds. I'm going to do this.
I'm just going to increase my
willpower." I think it's not willpower,
it's neurobiology.
>> I think it's really important to just
spend a little bit of moment talking
about this part of the brain because
when I discovered it, I found it
absolutely fascinating. And I think it
was Andrew Huberman who said
>> either to me or he said publicly that he
thinks it's one of the most fascinating
or important discoveries of the last
century.
>> Of course, well, you think about um how
we're living our lives. We're we're
punishing ourselves for not being able
to read a book, for not being able to
pay attention. How many, you know,
people are now diagnosing, self
diagnosing themselves with ADHD, low
attention spans, and they're blaming it
on environment? They're blaming it on
circumstances when they should be
blaming it on neurobiology and they
should be blaming it on their brain
state. this area of the brain if you can
push it and this is why these super
aagers seem to have
>> what's a superager
>> a superager is somebody who is aging
well so they're going through life uh
low uh cardiovascular disease state
they've maintained their cognitive
functions they're at the age of 80 90
with a a V2 max profile of maybe a 50 or
60 year old so they're aging quite well
biologically
So these you know super ages have many
many different facets to them and one of
them is a larger mid singular cortex.
Conversely the AMCC anterior midsular
cortex shrinks in people who live
sedentary lives or avoid challenges. It
literally atrophies if you play it safe
in life too often. Growth only occurs
during resistance. If you love taking
ice baths and you take one, your AMCC
doesn't change. If you hate the cold but
force yourself to do it anyway, the AMCC
grows.
>> Scientists now view the AMCC as the seat
of the will to live. Its size and
activity level are strong predictors of
how long an individual will survive
after a major setback in their life,
whether it's a health setback or a
surgery.
>> There's something really philosophical
about that as well. You know, if you I
don't know if you read um stoicism or
anything, but it it it really dates back
to how the Stoics lived their life,
especially Marcus Aurelius, with being
able to push through hard times. Little
did they know that it was this little
area in the brain.
>> Yeah. Yeah, I think I was telling the
story the other day of Roosevelt and
what happened in his life as a young man
when he came home one day on Valentine's
Day and found that his mother and his
wife of who had just had his newborn
baby had both died, one upstairs, one
downstairs, and he went off to the bad
lands for two I think it was 2 to four
years. The Badlands in America were just
this like horrific um natural place
where he'd get up at 4:00 a.m. ride
these like horses in the freezing cold
where like the horses would literally
die standing still because it was so
horrific. He did that to two years to
like deal with the grief. But when he
came back to New York City after this
two years in the Badlands, all of his
friends said he was just a completely
different man. He had and what they now
know from a neuroscience perspective is
that he didn't just build his muscles.
He literally like rewired his his brain.
He went on to become the youngest US
president of all time. He got shot um
during a speech and carried on doing the
speech. He led the charge in various
wars. He's just this unbelievable. I
think he won the Nobel Prize. and they
point at those two years in the bad
lands and say actually that that forged
not just the man but his his brain his
AMCC. The studies also show that
athletes consider consistently show much
larger AMCC volume and studies show that
individuals struggling with obesity
often have smaller AMCC's but but it
begins to grow the moment they start a
successful challenging dietary or
exercise intervention. that it's that
word challenging because when you place
stimulus upon a system, it adapts and
grows and that is neurobiology at its
most infinite source. And this is why we
get the breakdown of these synapses.
This is why we get into a place of going
from 5,000 to 10,000 connections to
2,000 or no connections. these dendritic
spines end up breaking down because we
don't do the hard thing. And I also
think being deep rooted in neurobiology,
you can see that everything is cause and
effect and it's a cycle. Uh if you don't
do the hard thing, you don't grow the
AMCC. You don't grow the AMCC, you don't
do the hard thing again. And it's just
this loop and it's this cycle which is
why so many resolutions, New Year's
resolutions end by February 1st. It's
why we have the obesity epidemic. It's
largely why I think we've got a a crisis
of people not being able to uh meet
their goals.
I'm just fascinated from an evolutionary
perspective as to why we needed one and
like why it wasn't just always big
>> in the pursuit uh you know
evolutionarily uh in the pursuit of
hunting and going out and and hunting
for food sources and being motivated to
do that in a near starvation state when
times were tough
>> and so when times got easier we didn't
need it as much so we could conserve I
guess our energy so we could like scale
down our willpower when times were good.
>> Well, it's interesting that you say that
because this brings up the whole brain
rot and AI era just like with, you know,
in uh 2024, Oxford dictionary, I think,
named brain rot the word of the year.
And it's interesting because it plays
into evolution and what's happening with
this AMCC, meaning like we're just there
scrolling at mindless information every
day, training our brain to get these
small dopamine hits, these small rewards
from doing absolutely nothing.
>> What do you think of these uh chat bots
that everybody's using at the moment to
write for them and think for them, etc.?
>> Oh my god. I think it's uh on the
spectrum of being so incredible but
being so detrimentally harmful. I know
this with myself. So I was a
mathematician. I did my masters of
mathematics and I was able Steven to the
trigonometry and pure calculus that I
could do back then with just my head and
a pen was fascinating. Now I'm going to
I'm going out and I'm calculating on
chat GPT the bill the the the 20% tip on
top of this bill. How much does it cost?
And I think how dumb am I actually
getting? So I think it's both good and
bad. I think the rate of decline we're
seeing in people reading books and
exercising their brain is declining. Um,
and our ability to
think
and and use our our cognition is
declining.
>> Louis, I've I've um waited uh a long
time to ask you one particular question,
which is I think is very important,
which is you're clearly very passionate
about this stuff.
One might say you're pretty obsessed
with it. You come across as pretty
obsessed.
>> Do I?
>> You do. Yeah. Why?
>> We are living in a society
that doesn't allow women to ask for what
they want. We're living in a society
they need. And when this happens, it
results in 70% of all Alzheimer's
disease cases being women. It results in
80% of all autoimmune diseases being
female. And these are largely
preventable diseases. And when I ask why
and I hear that women are wildly
misrepresented in academic literature,
when I when I see women who downplay
their symptoms or they're too scared to
ask their doctor for advice or they're
too scared to ask somebody else for
advice because of what they're going
through or they're ashamed of some of
their symptoms, I get angry and I get
passionate. And it reminds me of my
grandmother who uh she was my best
friend. Her name was Louisa. And
>> you're named after her.
>> I was named after her. Yes. And we spent
every day together. And And I'm getting
emotional now cuz I remember her. And
she sadly died of pancreatic cancer. It
was ovarian cancer that went to
pancreatic cancer. And
she never asked for what she wanted. And
she never asked for what she needed,
which was help. She didn't understand
her symptoms. She didn't go to the
doctor when she needed to because she
was just more
inclined to look after the family and
look after the household. And when the
time came that she was given her
diagnosis, I was sitting there with her.
It was um it was at home and the doctor
came. She did a house call and my
grandmother looked at her. She hardly
spoke that much English and she said,
"Please, is there something I can do? I
don't want to die." And the doctor said,
"There's I'm sorry, there's nothing you
can do." And I spent every day with her
in the hospital. And I think about that,
it's been almost 20 years now, but I
think about that moment and I kick
myself thinking, why didn't we why
didn't we get her a scan? She told us
several times that her stomach was
hurting. She told her several times that
she felt pain. She never she hid her
symptoms. She hardly ever ate at one
point and we never stopped to think
about why and she never stopped to think
about why. So I think about her every
day. And then I think about my mother
too and these women, you know, first
generation, they came uh we migrated to
Australia from a country called Cyprus
and they've just been so they put
themselves second and they they just
look after the family and I can't stand
that. And when I see women coming in as
patients
or caregivers, I think to myself, do you
not know that there is something for you
to do? And most women don't. And I I
can't believe the amount of money that
we are spending that is going towards
putting us on rockets to go to Mars, but
we haven't yet found a cure for this
disease that is largely preventable.
It's just not okay with me. And I would
hate to see women go through this.
>> The emotion is still very present in
your face even though it was so long
ago.
>> It was so long ago. I mean, I was very
close to her. I'm very close with my
mother. I I check in with her twice,
three times a day. And I just don't
think it's fair. I think women deserve
the truth. They've been lied to. They've
been underrepresented.
And
we need to change that. with Louisa,
your grandmother, what are those range
of emotions that have turned into this
incredible fire? You have
>> anger.
>> Anger is one of the emotions. Anger at
society that places women to be
everything. To be a a mother, a
caregiver, to go to work, to represent
the family. women represent 51% of the
total population
and then it becomes I feel political if
that's an emotion because you think
about health care you think health care
should be accessible to everybody but it
seems as though especially in this
country that health care is only really
accessible by those with a high
socioeconomic status and that I'm not
okay with so it does become political
even though healthcare I Yes, healthcare
is political because policies have been
set, but a woman in need is apolitical.
And my grandmother was a-political and
her needs
just were not met.
anger,
>> frustration at the system, frustration
at the fact that we still have only 4%
of women taking hormone replacement
therapy in fear that they're going to
get this disease, uh that they're going
to get breast cancer, utterly frustrated
at the cycles of administration who
vouched to help you. you look to your,
you know, your government and your
administration
to look up to, to guide you when you
have Secretary Kennedy in 2014 go on
national television and say, "Vaccines
are totally safe. I had all my kids
vaccinated. They've eradicated some of
the most deadliest diseases that have
plagued this world. Vaccines are so
safe." to fast forward to 2025
saying vaccines are so unsafe. Do not
trust your medical doctor. You need to
take your health into your own hands.
You start to lose trust.
And it's not that we're uninformed.
It's the fact that we are confused
because we hear vaccines are bad. Oh,
vaccines are good. Vaccines are are
really good. Take them. Don't get your
kid vaccine. You've got women here who
don't even know their they they don't
even know how to get on the internet or
order a blood testing. You're expecting
them to take their health into their own
hands. So, it upsets me that you see
women who are so vulnerable
being sold a a a vaccine lie which could
potentially save them from a disease
which could potentially save them or
their child from getting the flu,
hepatitis B,
menitis, which was just eradicated from
the vaccine schedule. Um, I'm not, this
is not meant to be political. I am I am
a scientist. I am not. This is not
propaganda. This is not ideology. This
is just women who deserve to be treated
better.
>> You're 36.
Louisa passed away when you were how
old?
>> Oh, I was uh probably 18 at the time.
>> You were 18 when you
>> Around that 18, 19
>> when she got the diagnosis.
>> Yeah, it was very fast. It was within a
two month time frame. Not even.
>> And had she not got that diagnosis and
had you not sat there and watched her
ask that doctor if there's something
that she could do,
>> do you think your career would have
taken this course?
>> I became utterly obsessed with disease
management. But when I first saw a human
brain, I was 21. I was in a lab and we
had to go into a cadaavver lab and I saw
a brain being harvested from a a body
that was donated and I stayed back that
day. I remember and I helped in the
pathology lab and when I saw that brain
I knew that I wanted to dedicate my life
to it. So ever since then I've been in
OS and it's where I feel most alive.
>> Why why did you want to dedicate your
life to it? Because when you know what
the brain is that it is responsible for
the life that we have and you can use it
for your advantage to overcome any
obstacle that comes your way you become
obsessed with understanding it.
Metacognition is thinking about your
thoughts and every day if you can think
about why you think about the things you
think about you can challenge yourself
to overcome any adversity. Is there a
cost to your obsession and your passion?
>> Yes.
>> What's the cost?
>> I moved away from my family to be
surrounded by the greatest neurosurgeons
in the world, which I am, and I'm very
thankful for that. I moved away from a
population of 22 million to come to the
hardest city in the world,
>> New York.
>> New York City.
>> Are you still paying a cost?
>> I'm still paying a cost. My health pays
a cost.
I've missed family events, traveling for
my career.
But I wouldn't have it any other way
because the people that I've met have
forged the way for me to live the life
that I want. I'm surrounded by
incredible thought leaders in health and
medicine. And
>> so what is success to you then at the
deepest possible level? What is success?
We meet again in 10 years time. You say
my life has been a success or I feel
successful. I'm a Louisa says I am a
successful woman. What does that mean?
What happened?
>> Being able to control my brain states.
>> Being able to control your brain states.
>> I think that the ultimate form of
success and high performance or being
able to perform at your peak is being
able to go from brain state to brain
state and then be able to recover.
>> What do you mean by brain state? meaning
like being able to get switched on when
you need to be switched on and invite
the neurotransmitters involved in that.
Norepinephrine, adrenaline, dopamine,
but not having that in constant
overdrive and being able to know when to
switch off. And I think that that is
what high performance is. The book that
changed my mind on that was flow by Mihi
Chicksimni, which actually speaks about
the flow state. So being able to know
how to uh separate yourself in these
states.
>> Any goals outside of your professional
[laughter]
>> kids, family, life? Love kids, family.
>> Yeah, definitely.
>> It's tough, isn't it?
>> It's tough. I was saying earlier to my
friend that, you know, I kind of just
thought the minute I wanted to have
kids, they would just appear. But it's
not so strange.
>> That's what I thought, too, until I
realized, oh, but I'm the woman.
[laughter]
I actually have to bear the the children
as well,
>> which is a big sacrifice and an
>> honor. It's an honor and a privilege and
a sacrifice that I think everybody Yeah,
I I mean I think I I definitely want.
>> Are you hopeful for all of your
professional endeavors?
>> Yes,
>> you are hopeful.
>> I'm in control.
you think we're going to move in a good
direction as a society as it relates to
>> Alzheimer's and
>> Yes, I I am hopeful for that. I'm
hopeful for the message that I'm getting
across. I think uh social media is
providing the platform for free
education and for people to understand
that they have agency over their brains.
Uh, I'm not hopeful for um anybody
saving us or coming in and giving us a
easy way forward.
>> Do you ever have days where you wish you
were less obsessed with your craft?
[laughter]
>> Has there ever been a day where you're
like, you know, I wish I was just a
little bit less captivated by this?
>> Sometimes I do. Yeah, I think if I
didn't, well, I'd be probably back home
in Australia living an average person's
life. I'm not saying that that's it. I'm
just saying, you know, maybe I would
have done it done my life differently.
>> I have days like that where I think if
[snorts] obviously cuz the obsessed
brain is the one making this decision.
So, it's quite difficult to detach. But
like if you put a knob in front of me
and I could just turn it down just a
little bit, would I? Now, my obsessed
brain is is the one making this
decision. So, my obsessed brain is like,
"Fuck it, turn it up."
>> But I think I do wonder sometimes. I am
the way that I am, right? Um, but I do
wonder sometimes if I would be
happier overall if I could just turn it
down a little bit.
>> But isn't the whole point of life to
know thyself and in pursuit of something
bigger and better?
>> Yeah, it is. But I just sometimes worry
about what I'm sacrificing and whether
at some point, I don't know, when I'm on
my deathbed at 80 years old, I'm going
to look back and say, "Actually,
I made a bad trade."
>> Well, exactly. And but we're never going
to know that. I I think about that
often. I know you think about that often
and you think, well, if the world came
to a a collapse tomorrow, what would you
regret today not having done?
>> I think it would be like making more
memories with people I love. I think
that's one of the big ones. I think
>> did you hear what you just said? Making
more memories
>> and imagine losing those. Imagine a life
full of like
>> you know creating these experiences and
these memories to have them being taken
away from you.
>> Yeah.
>> To not being able to recognize your
wife, your kids, and looking in the
mirror and not being able to recognize
yourself.
>> That's why Alzheimer's is just such a
disgusting, sinister, like [snorts]
horrific thing cuz
Yeah. It's just
>> the most heartbreaking thing to to lose
someone while they're still alive.
>> Yeah. And to lose yourself. We've got
this one woman who looks in the mirror
and she says, "Who's that?"
>> Really?
>> Yeah. And you know, it's it's sad
because two years ago she knew who I was
and now she asks, "Are you my daughter?"
And when you're confronted with that
every single day, it gets you thinking.
You don't live a normal life. You don't
live an average life because you do
think about every facet of medicine. You
think about history. You think about
diseases. And then you think about life
and the people that you spend the most
time with.
>> We have a closing tradition where the
last guest leaves the question for the
next not knowing who they're leaving it
for. And the question left for you is,
what is God to you?
God is
that power that you feel and have faith
in that you cannot see. The power that
um
basically makes you feel like there is
somebody there that has you and that is
guiding you
that
always has a a path for you knowing
>> you you believe in God. Yes, I'm I'm I'm
a I'm I'm Christian. I'm Greek Orthodox.
>> When you see the brain deteriorating in
such a way and you think about this
concept of prayer, like asking God to
help me with something, doesn't it feel
pretty I mean, it's the definition of
like hopelessness is watching your brain
deteriorate. And I think some part of my
struggles with religion since I was an
18-year-old and I came from a very
religious family was seeing injustice in
the world. And there's doesn't seem to
be much greater injustice than watching
someone's brain just deteriorate in
front of their family.
>> Yeah. Or somebody going through losing
their child and you start to think about
God.
>> People pray for I can't find my keys. I
want my football team to win. And I go
there's no point. If people praying for
an Alzheimer's cure are having no luck,
then maybe I should stop praying for
Manchester United to win.
>> Yeah. If you understood the intricacies
of how we were actually brought into
this world from the point of conception,
from the point of conception to the
point of neural development, how a baby
is formed and how precise everything has
to be for you to come out the way you
did.
It is so beautiful and so miraculous and
so rare. even though there are billions
of people in this world that you cannot
just turn to biology anymore, you have
to turn to something bigger. And I used
to, trust me, even as a as a Greek, as a
Christian who's read the Bible, I even
in my early 20s when I was getting into
medicine and science, I I was so gung-ho
about [sighs]
we we're born in a body, we die in a
body. But then when you get so deep into
the literature of science and medicine
and biology,
it's hard to ignore God. And it's hard
to ignore that there is a higher power
out there. And why is it that there are
chapels in hospitals?
>> Because people want to go to heaven.
Because people want an alter an
alternative method of getting through
whatever it is that they can get
through. Something that science and
medicine cannot offer and believing in
something that is not there or something
that hasn't occurred yet is having
faith.
I work in neurosurgery and some of the
cases you think this person's not coming
out of here alive and the fact that they
do and they preserve their cognitive
functions and they look next to normal
after they've had a massive tumor
resected which is a true story from here
the tumor was going all along this one
woman's face who was 78 years old who
traveled here from France to have the
tumor reected how is it that she's
walking and she's cognitively normal and
she's not even on any medication the
next day. How is that possible? Is it
God? Is it just miraculous
neurosurgeons? There's just some things
that medicine can't answer.
>> I agree with that. I [clears throat] am
I don't think I'm arrogant enough to say
that I know
and I'm curious
and I think I'll never know.
>> Yeah.
>> So, I guess that's where we need to have
faith.
>> Yep.
>> Louisa, thank you so much. Um it's very
important that you do the work that you
do because uh it's people like yourself
that are so passionate, so obsessed and
so good at communicating that um help
average people who aren't who don't have
access to the wisdom and the research
and studies and information that you
have understand all of these things. And
it's through this understanding that we
can make better choices and preserve our
life, preserve our brains and if we
preserve our brains, we preserve
everything that matters.
>> Correct. Thank you.
>> So thank you for doing what you do and I
appreciate your passion and dedication
to it because it's very very important.
I know it comes at a cost. So, I feel
obliged to tell you that as a normal
person who isn't involved in your field,
we're grateful.
>> Thank you so much, Stephen.
>> Thank you. YouTube [snorts] have this
new crazy algorithm where they know
exactly what video you would like to
watch next based on AI and all of your
viewing behavior. And the algorithm says
that this video is the perfect video for
you. It's different for everybody
looking right now. Check this video out
and I bet you you might love it.